some of my story:

Clojure was the first programming language i took seriously and used to build things with - i found out later that my choice was unique

listened to rich hickey  talks like hammock driven dev and stu halloway talks (which ones) before I knew what a repl was - do other languages have philosophical leaders with ideas that go beyond their languages? i basically joined a cult, right?

a combination of things kept things more straightforward in a world that was getting deeper and more vast the longer I stayed with it

lisp syntax - minimal

immutability - you are not changing things in place - that tree is still a magnolia tree

no types, procedures, objects - didnt even know what those things were - ew.

these things fostered focus on given problem at hand - single strands - avoid unnecessary complexity

parenthesis were helpful in providing boundaries - seeing things as expressions - THIS HERE BETWEEN THESE ( ) THINGS WILL EVALUATE TO SOMETHING

repl - immediate feedback, small feedback loops

eval to comment for everything !!! what does this evaluate to? what is the shape  of my result?

made huge scratch pads to test ideas - was that weird? it worked for me

resources - philosophical talks, clojure for the brave and true, clojure koans, lurked on clojurians slack - too scared to ask any questions there, looking for community, messaging daniel higginbotham and jordan miller out of no where, clojure camp was developing, i was one of the founding students, found great commorodery around learning this thing together, show and tell for projects, accountability every week! thortech solutions every week.

volunteering at and going to conferences - meeting your heroes, meet the people creating with the same language you are, talking, listening

what drew me to clojure? i didnt know much about it - but i listened to the things the author said, and the people who work closely on the project and datomic as well, and i got to know some of them and my gosh they are so smart, kind, and FUNNY, I thought - this seems like a really cool language and community that people are really excited about. i want to be excited about it too!

i learned programming thru the lens of clojure so lets take any general programming language concept - how does clojure make easier, clearer, simpler, more straight to the point?

oh my gosh, clojure is so hard. is it? isn’t programming just hard?